CASMPET-7657: add doc for moving unmanaged OSDs (#6258)
Cray-HPE/docs-csm: operations/utility_storage/Move_Unmanaged_OSDs.md

# Move Unmanaged Ceph OSDs

> **`IMPORTANT:`** This document is addressing how to move all unmanaged OSDs when they should
> be managed by the ceph orchestrator. If some OSDs are intentionally unmanaged, do not use

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**`IMPORTANT:`** This document addresses how to move OSDs that are unmanaged, but should actually
be managed by the Ceph orchestrator. For OSDs that are intentionally unmanaged, do not use
```

this document to move them.

> (`ncn-s#`) Check to see if you have unmanaged OSDs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(`ncn-s#`) Check for unmanaged OSDs.
```

```bash
ceph orch ls | awk 'NR==1 || /osd/'
```

> Example output (the example shows 8 unmanaged OSDs with `osd` service name):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Example output (the following example shows eight unmanaged OSDs with `osd` service name):
```

> ```bash

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```text
````

NAME                       PORTS        RUNNING  REFRESHED  AGE  PLACEMENT 
osd                                           8  5m ago     -    <unmanaged>
osd.all-available-devices                    16  5m ago     6d   *
```

In addition, the following command shows that `osd` service has `unmanaged` set to `true`:

```bash
ceph orch ls --service_name osd --export
```

Example output:

```text
service_type: osd
service_name: osd
unmanaged: true  <-----
spec:
  filter_logic: AND
  objectstore: bluestore
```

## Prerequisites

This procedure requires administrative privileges and assumes `osd` as the service name for

> unmanaged OSDs as shown in the example output above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
unmanaged OSDs, as shown in the example output above.
```

## Procedure

1. Log in as `root` on the first storage node \(`ncn-s001`\).

    ```bash
    ssh ncn-s001
    ```

> 1. (`ncn-s#`) Create a service specification `yaml` file with the following content.

Reviewer: ````suggestion
Perform the following steps on every storage node that has unintentionally unmanaged OSDs,

1. (`ncn-s#`) Create a service specification YAML file with the following content:
````

    ```yaml
    service_type: osd
    service_name: osd
    unmanaged: false
    placement:
      host_pattern: '*'
    spec:
      data_devices:
        all: true
      filter_logic: AND
      objectstore: bluestore
    ```

1. (`ncn-s#`) Apply the service specification defined in the above `yaml` file.

    ```bash
    ceph orch apply -i <above_yaml_file>
    ```

> 1. (`ncn-s#`) Verify that `osd` service name no longer has `unmanaged` set to `true`

Reviewer 3: To make consistent with other points, add period.
```suggestion
1. (`ncn-s#`) Verify that `osd` service name no longer has `unmanaged` set to `true`.
```

    ```bash
    ceph orch ls --service_name osd --export
    ```

    Example output (no `unmanaged` line):

    ```text
    service_type: osd
    service_name: osd
    placement:
      host_pattern: '*'
    spec:
      data_devices:
        all: true
      filter_logic: AND
      objectstore: bluestore
    ```

1. (`ncn-s#`) Verify that there are no unmanaged OSDs:

    ```bash
    ceph orch ls | awk 'NR==1 || /osd/'
    ```

    Example output (`osd` service no longer shows `<unmanaged>` placement):

    ```bash
    NAME                       PORTS        RUNNING  REFRESHED  AGE  PLACEMENT 
    osd                                           8  10m ago    -    *
    osd.all-available-devices                    16  10m ago    7d   *
    ```

> 1. (`ncn-s#`) On each storage node, identify OSDs with `osd` service name.

Reviewer: ````suggestion
1. (`ncn-s#`) Apply the service specification defined in the above YAML file.

    ```bash
    ceph orch apply -i <above_yaml_file>
    ```

1. (`ncn-s#`) Verify that `osd` service name no longer has `unmanaged` set to `true`.

    ```bash
    ceph orch ls --service_name osd --export
    ```

    Example output (no `unmanaged` line):

    ```yaml
    service_type: osd
    service_name: osd
    placement:
      host_pattern: '*'
    spec:
      data_devices:
        all: true
      filter_logic: AND
      objectstore: bluestore
    ```

1. (`ncn-s#`) Verify that there are no unmanaged OSDs.

    ```bash
    ceph orch ls | awk 'NR==1 || /osd/'
    ```

    Example output (`osd` service no longer shows `<unmanaged>` placement):

    ```text
    NAME                       PORTS        RUNNING  REFRESHED  AGE  PLACEMENT 
    osd                                           8  10m ago    -    *
    osd.all-available-devices                    16  10m ago    7d   *
    ```

1. (`ncn-s#`) On each storage node, identify OSDs with `osd` service name.
````

>     The following example shows 8 such OSDs on one storage node.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    The following example shows eight such OSDs on one storage node.
```

    ```bash
    cephadm ls | jq -r '.[] | select(.service_name=="osd").name'
    ```

    Example output:

    ```text
    osd.12
    osd.15
    osd.18
    osd.19
    osd.20
    osd.21
    osd.22
    osd.23
    ```

**`NOTE:`** Be sure to replace the `<CLUSTER_ID>` and `<OSD_ID>` field in the following
steps with the actual Ceph cluster ID and OSD ID being updated.
For example, if the OSD is `osd.12`, the `<OSD_ID>` value would be 12.

1. (`ncn-s#`) For each OSD from the above output, update its service name to
`osd.all-available-devices` as follows.

    ```bash
    cd /var/lib/ceph/<CLUSTER_ID>
    sed -i '/service_name/s/osd/osd.all-available-devices/g' osd.<OSD_ID>/unit.meta
    ```

1. (`ncn-s#`) After all OSDs from the above list have been updated on the storage node,
verify no OSDs have the service name other than `osd.all-available-devices`.

    ```bash
    for f in osd.*/unit.meta; do jq -r .service_name "$f"; done | uniq
    ```

    Example output:

    ```text
    osd.all-available-devices
    ```

1. (`ncn-s#`) Repeat the above steps on other storage nodes if they also have
unmanaged OSDs.

> 1. (`ncn-s#`) After all such OSDs have been updated, wait for a minute and verify that `osd`

Reviewer: ````suggestion
1. (`ncn-s#`) For each OSD from the above output, update its service name to
    `osd.all-available-devices` as follows.

    > Be sure to replace the `<CLUSTER_ID>` and `<OSD_ID>` field in the following
    > command with the actual Ceph cluster ID and OSD ID being updated.
    > For example, if the OSD is `osd.12`, the `<OSD_ID>` value would be 12.

    ```bash
    cd /var/lib/ceph/<CLUSTER_ID>
    sed -i '/service_name/s/osd/osd.all-available-devices/g' osd.<OSD_ID>/unit.meta
    ```

1. (`ncn-s#`) After all OSDs from the above list have been updated on the storage node,
    verify no OSDs have the service name other than `osd.all-available-devices`.

    ```bash
    for f in osd.*/unit.meta; do jq -r .service_name "$f"; done | uniq
    ```

    Example output:

    ```text
    osd.all-available-devices
    ```

1. (`ncn-s#`) Repeat the above steps on other storage nodes if they also have unmanaged OSDs.

1. (`ncn-s#`) After all such OSDs have been updated, wait for a minute and verify that `osd`
````

service name has zero OSDs by running the following command.

    ```bash
    ceph orch ls | awk 'NR==1 || /osd/'
    ```

    Example output:

    ```text
    NAME                       PORTS        RUNNING  REFRESHED  AGE  PLACEMENT 
    osd                                           0  -          31m  *
    osd.all-available-devices                    24  20s ago    7d   *
    ```

**`NOTE:`** If `osd` service name does not show zero OSDs, it's likely that you neglected
to perform the update on some OSDs or from some storage nodes. Make sure no OSD has `osd`

> service name before proceeding.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    **`NOTE:`** A non-zero count of OSDs under the `osd` service name may indicate that the update was not
    applied to certain OSDs or storage nodes. Ensure that no OSDs are associated with the `osd` service name
    before proceeding.
```
